What causes melanoma?
How can I tell the difference between melanoma and other forms of skin cancer?
What does it mean that my cancer has metastasized?
What are the facts about melanoma?
What are the types of melanoma?
What is metastatic melanoma?
What are the stages of melanoma?
What are the top questions about melanoma?
How many lymph nodes are affected with melanoma?
Will the rest of the lymph nodes be removed? If yes, what are the potential complications of lymph node surgery?
Has the melanoma spilled out of the lymph node? This is called extranodal extension of the melanoma. What does this mean for my treatment?
Where has the melanoma spread? Do I need a brain scan or PET-CT scan to find where it has spread?
Is surgical removal of the metastases an option, especially if 1 or 2 tumors are present? If so, what are the benefits and risks?
How far has my melanoma spread? How did you determine that?
How far has the melanoma spread within or beneath the skin? How thick is the melanoma?
Has the melanoma spread to other parts of my body?
Will I need any other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Will I need to see any other types of doctors?
If I need it, who can help me with concerns about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment?
What are the possible benefits?
How do the possible risks and benefits of this trial compare to those of the standard treatment?
How will my health information be kept private?
What happens if I decide to leave the trial? 
What is your experience in treating people with melanoma?
Who else will be on my treatment team?
Are cancer cells present anywhere else in my body?
What labs/test results will I need to get a second opinion?
Can you help coordinate my care close to home?
How will you work with my primary care physician and/or care team?
What stage is my melanoma? How did you determine that?
Should I get a second opinion?
I've been diagnosed with melanoma! Now what?
What type of melanoma do I have?
How thick is the melanoma?
Has the melanoma spread?
What are the symptoms of melanoma? 
I have a family history of melanoma, should I get genetic testing?
What are the stages of melanoma?
What does malignant melanoma look like?
Skin cancer is definitively diagnosed by what?
Does changes in colored lesions are signs of skin cancer?
What are the ABCs of skin cancer?
Which state leads the nation in skin cancer cases?
Who is most at risk of skin cancer?
Which country has the highest rates of skin cancer?
What is melanoma?
Which are the risk factors for melanoma?
How can i tell if a mole might be cancerous?
What happens if my doctor suspects melanoma?
How is melanoma treated?











