Melanoma Treatment Costs. A Systematic Review of the Literature, 1990–2011. Melanoma is the most deadly form of skin cancer and an important public health concern. Given the substantial health burden associated with melanoma, it is important to examine the economic costs associated with its treatment. The purpose of the current study was to systematically review the literature on the direct medical care costs of melanoma. Evidence acquisition A systematic review was performed using multiple databases including MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, and Econlit. Nineteen articles on the direct medical costs of melanoma were identified. Evidence synthesis . Detailed information on the study population, study country/setting, study perspective, costing approach, disease severity (stage), and key study results were abstracted. The overall costs of melanoma were examined as well as per-patient costs, costs by phase of care, stage of diagnosis, and setting/type of care. Among studies examining all stages of melanoma, annual treatment costs ranged from $44.9 million among Medicare patients with existing cases to $932.5 million among newly diagnosed cases across all age groups.Conclusions. Melanoma leads to substantial direct medical care costs, with estimates varying widely because of the heterogeneity across studies in terms of the study setting, populations studied, costing approach, and study methods. Melanoma treatment costs varied by phase of care and stage at diagnoses; costs were highest among patients diagnosed with late-stage disease and in the initial and terminal phases of care. Aggregate treatment costs were generally highest in the outpatient/office-based setting; per-patient/per-case treatment costs were highest in the hospital inpatient setting. Given the substantial costs of treating melanoma, public health strategies should include efforts to enhance both primary prevention (reduction of ultraviolet light exposure) and secondary prevention (earlier detection) of melanoma.
Although the survival benefits of being diagnosed with early-stage melanoma have been documented clearly,41 it is also important to examine the economic impact of treating early- versus late-stage melanoma. It is clear from this review that the medical costs of melanoma are highest among people diagnosed with late-stage melanoma and during the terminal phase of care. For example, Tsao et al.21 found that 55% of the annual direct cost for treating melanoma is for patients with Stage-IV disease, and about one third of the total cost is related to treating melanoma at the end of life. Yabroff et al.15 found that the net costs of care in the last year of life among patients with distant disease were approximately double the costs among patients diagnosed with local disease.

The findings showing that aggregate costs for melanoma treatment are generally higher in the outpatient setting is consistent with the literature on cancer treatment patterns. A recent study has shown that cancer-related treatment costs have shifted away from the inpatient setting and toward the outpatient setting.42 In 2002–2003, the overwhelming majority (87%) of cancer patients visited physician offices.43 Although the per-patient/per-case costs are lower in the outpatient setting, the high volume of services provided makes it the most costly component of melanoma treatment at the aggregate level. However, treatment costs tend to be the highest in the inpatient hospital setting when examined on a per-patient/per-case basis, likely an effect of higher unit costs, and the likelihood that those treated in the inpatient setting are more advanced cases requiring more-intensive and costly treatment.In the U.S., diagnosis of melanoma in the outpatient setting has been shown to be one factor leading to the under-reporting of melanoma cases to central cancer registries, and the subsequent underestimate of disease burden.44 However, it is clear that melanoma treatment presents a substantial economic burden, particularly among late-stage diagnoses and during the terminal phase of care. Given the magnitude of these costs, increased efforts around primary and secondary prevention are warranted. If effective, these efforts have the potential to prevent melanoma cases, diagnose cases in earlier stages, increase survival, and reduce the health and economic burden associated with melanoma. For example, it has been estimated that if all melanoma patients were diagnosed in Stage 0 or I, the annual direct costs of melanoma treatment among those aged ≥65 years would be 40%–65% lower than their current value, resulting in substantial cost savings in Medicare.Given these findings, strategies must include efforts to enhance both primary prevention (reduction of ultraviolet [UV] light exposure) and secondary prevention (earlier detection). Although routine screening for early detection of skin cancer currently is not recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and the National Health and Medical Research Council,45,46 screening among individuals at increased risk for melanoma has been shown to be cost effective and should be considered. For example, Freedberg et al.47 estimated a cost-effectiveness ratio of $29,170 per life-year saved for a one-time screening by dermatologists among high-risk individuals in the U.S. Similarly, in Australia the cost effectiveness of screening individuals aged ≥50 years by family practice doctors every 2 years was estimated to be $12,318 and $21,188 (U.S. dollars) for men and women, respectively.There are several effective primary prevention strategies that can be implemented to help reduce the burden of melanoma. Specifically, the Community Preventive Services Task Force recommends education and policy interventions in primary schools, and programs for adults in outdoor recreational or tourism settings in an effort to improve sun-avoidance or skin-covering behaviors.49 Additionally, a review by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has shown that primary care–relevant behavioral counseling can increase sun-protective behaviors and decrease indoor tanning.These prevention efforts have the potential to not only improve health but also to save money. For example, the SunWise School Program, a sun-safety education program developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to teach children how to protect themselves from overexposure to the sun could lead to substantial reductions in skin cancer incidence and mortality, while saving $2–$4 in medical care and productivity loss for each dollar invested in the program.51 Similarly, in Australia, the SunSmart public education program motivating sun-protection behavior through structural, environmental, and legislative initiatives is estimated to save 22,000 life-years in the future, while saving approximately $2 for every dollar invested.Although there are many risk factors that influence the likelihood of developing melanoma, the most preventable known risk factor is exposure to UV radiation, from the sun and artificial devices such as tanning beds.53,54 Despite recent evidence demonstrating the link between indoor tanning beds and melanoma, the use of indoor tanning devices remains common among both youth and adults in the U.S.38,39,55,56 Given the known health risk associated with indoor tanning, many organizations recommend regulations limiting access to such devices.57,58 In the U.S., more than 30 states have laws restricting minors’ access to tanning facilities,51 although the presence of such legislation has been shown to have limited effectiveness.59 Successful regulations could lead to both health and economic benefits. For example, in Australia it was estimated that stricter regulations on indoor tanning could avert an average of 24 melanoma cases per 100,000 people and $32,000 in medical costs in these same people.Given the rising incidence of melanoma, treatment of the disease will continue to be a substantial economic burden. In recent years, more-effective and expensive melanoma treatments have been introduced. An evaluation of the use of these newer expensive treatments and the impact of their use on melanoma survival, and the cost of melanoma care, will be an important area for future research. As treatment costs for advanced melanoma increase, prevention efforts should become even more cost effective. Additional research is needed to evaluate the impact of these prevention efforts, not only on the prevention and early detection of melanoma but also on the treatment costs of melanoma.
