Become familiar with your child's skin and the pattern of moles, freckles and other marks on his or her body. Be alert to changes in the number, size, shape and color of pigmented areas, as this can be a sign of melanoma.
The same “ABCDE rule” used to determine whether a doctor should check a mole in adults also applies to children and teenagers. Just remember that in children and teens, color may be lighter instead of darker.

A for asymmetry: One half is differently shaped than the other
B for border irregularity: Jagged or blurred edges
C for color: The pigmentation is not consistent; color could be light or dark
D for diameter: Moles greater than six millimeters (the size of a pencil eraser)
E for evolving: A mole changing in size, shape or color
Children at high risk should be seen by a pediatric dermatologist annually. Also, remember that melanoma can occur in places not exposed to the sun, so make sure your child’s scalp, feet, hands and buttocks are also checked.

In addition to a complete medical history and physical examination, melanoma is diagnosed with a biopsy of the lesion. It is important to have your child’s biopsy reviewed by a pediatric team. Dermatologists and pathologists used to seeing adult melanomas may not notice key signs of melanoma in children.     It is estimated that approximately 400 cases of melanoma are diagnosed each year in patients younger than 20 years in the United States, accounting for less than 1% of all new cases of melanoma.[84] Melanoma annual incidence in the United States (2011–2015) increases with age, as follows:[85] 
•	Children younger than 10 years: <1.8 cases per 1 million .   The diagnostic evaluation of melanoma includes the following:
•	Biopsy or excision. Biopsy or excision is necessary to determine the diagnosis of any skin cancer. Diagnosis is necessary for decisions regarding additional treatment. Although BCCs and SCCs are generally curable with surgery alone, the treatment of melanoma requires greater consideration because of its potential for metastasis. The width of surgical margins in melanoma is dictated by the site, size, and thickness of the lesion and ranges from 0.5 cm for in situ lesions to 2 cm or more for thicker lesions.[78] To achieve negative margins in children, wide excision with skin grafting may become necessary in selected cases.
•	Lymph node evaluation. Examination of regional lymph nodes using sentinel lymph node biopsy has become routine in many centers [122,123] and is recommended in patients with lesions measuring more than 1 mm in thickness or in those whose lesions are 1 mm or less in thickness and have unfavorable features such as ulceration or mitotic rate of 1 per mm2 or higher.[122,124,125] However, the indications for this procedure in patients with spitzoid melanomas has not been clearly defined. In a systematic review of 541 patients with atypical Spitz tumors, 303 (56%) underwent sentinel lymph node biopsy and 119 (39%) had a positive sentinel node; additional lymph node dissection in 97 of these patients revealed additional positive nodes in 18 patients (19%).[126] Despite the high incidence of nodal metastases, only six patients developed disseminated disease, questioning the prognostic and therapeutic benefit of this procedure in children with these lesions. In the future, molecular markers may help identify which patients might benefit from this procedure.

The role of completion lymph node dissection after a positive sentinel node and the value of adjuvant therapies in these patients is discussed in the Treatment section below.
Patients who present with conventional or adult-type melanoma should undergo laboratory and imaging evaluations on the basis of adult guidelines (refer to the Stage Information for Melanoma section in the PDQ summary on adult Melanoma Treatment for more information related to adult melanoma). In contrast, patients who are diagnosed with spitzoid melanomas have a low risk of recurrence and excellent clinical outcomes and do not require extensive radiographic evaluation either at diagnosis or follow-up.[127]
The diagnosis of pediatric melanoma may be difficult and many of these lesions may be confused with the so-called MELTUMP.[128] These lesions are biologically different from melanoma and benign nevi.[128,129] The terms Spitz nevus and spitzoid melanoma are also commonly used, creating additional confusion. One retrospective study found that children aged 10 years or older were more likely to present with amelanotic lesions, bleeding, uniform color, variable diameter, and elevation (such as a de novo bump).[130][Level of evidence: 3iiA]         Tests are done to detect, diagnose, and stage cancer. The tests used depend on the type of cancer. After cancer is diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread from where the cancer began to other parts of the body. The process used to find out if cancer cells have spread to other parts of the body is called staging. The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease. It is important to know the stage in order to plan the best treatment.
•	Children aged 10 to 14 years: 3.2 cases per 1 million.
•	Children aged 15 to 19 years: 10.4 cases per 1 million. 
Melanoma accounts for about 4% of all cancers in children aged 15 to 19 years.[85,86]
The incidence of pediatric melanoma increased by an average of 1.7% per year between 1975 and 1994,[85] but then decreased by 0.6% per year from 1995 to 2014.[87] Increased exposure to ambient ultraviolet (UV) radiation increases the risk of the disease. However, a review of United States Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data from 2000 to 2010 suggested that the incidence of melanoma in children and adolescents decreased over that interval.[88]  Early recognition is important to prevent progression of melanoma. Traditionally, the asymmetry, border irregularity, color variegation, diameter >6 mm, and evolution (ABCDE) criteria are used for clinical detection of melanoma. However, Cordoro et al10 found that 60% of children aged <10 years and 40% of adolescents did not meet the traditional ABCDE criteria. As a result, up to 82% of diagnoses took >6 months after detection and 62% of diagnoses took >2 months.10 Children presented with amelanosis, symmetry, regular borders, uniform color, and diameters of ≤6 mm. Cordoro et al10 thus proposed the following criteria to encompass characteristics more specific to pediatric melanoma: A = amelanotic; B = bleeding, bump; C = color uniformity; D = de novo, any diameter; and E = evolution of mole.10,37,39

A high index of suspicion is necessary when evaluating children. Dermatoscopic examination is important to visualize the morphologic features of pigmented and nonpigmented lesions to differentiate melanoma from nevi.34 Full-thickness biopsy is indicated for suspicious lesions. Excisional biopsies are recommended for concerning lesions. However, full-thickness punch biopsies are an acceptable alternative for specific locations (palms/soles, digits, face, or ears) or very large lesions. Shave biopsies can interfere with pathologic diagnosis and accurate measurements of Breslow thickness. Thus, shave biopsies should only be utilized for lesions with a very low index of suspicion.
