Pediatric melanoma can be subclassified into the following three main categories: conventional melanoma (CM), melanoma arising in CNM, and spitzoid melanoma.19 Differentiating between these subtypes is important because each type has different treatment options, risk factors, and histological findings. CMs show a high rate of single nucleotide variations (SNVs) that are characteristic of UV damage.20 This includes TERT-p mutations that result in a C→T coding change. As a result of this SNV, CM tumor cells have increased oncogene activity.20 CM also shows genetic similarity to adult melanoma, suggesting the potential for further research on treatments based on adult melanoma protocols.19 CMs and CNMs may be differentiated by BRAF and NRAS mutations, respectively. BRAF mutations in CMs only affect the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, thus requiring a supplementary PTEN mutation to result in melanoma. Since NRAS functions in both the mitogen-activated protein kinase and the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase/AKT pathway, an NRAS mutation in a CNM can lead to malignancy without a PTEN mutation.20 This is supported by evidence that melanoma arising in CNMs shows a lower frequency of UV-related mutations, possibly due to a higher baseline risk.

There is a broad spectrum of atypical melanocytic neoplasms, and the distinction between Spitz nevus, atypical Spitz tumor, spitzoid melanoma, and melanocytic tumors of uncertain malignant potential is controversial with little diagnostic agreement among dermatopathologists.21–23 Many of these melanocytic lesions are misdiagnosed as benign and only recognized later to be malignant after they have recurred. In one study, 35% of the cases originally classified as spitzoid upon review were determined to be CMs with epithelioid or spindle cells.22 Because of the difficulty in differentiating benign from malignant melanocytic lesions in pediatric patients, all histological slides should be reviewed by dermatopathologists highly experienced in the diagnosis of such lesions.

Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and immunohistochemistry (IHC) have been used as ancillary diagnostic tools to differentiate between melanoma and benign nevi in adults.24 Melanoma has a variety of patterns of chromosomal aberrations of multiple chromosomal gains and/or losses. Conversely, the majority of Spitz nevi patients have a normal karyotype.25 Atypical Spitz tumors represent a heterogeneous group with distinct genetic subtypes, including BRAFV600E/BAP1neg, HRAS mutant with increased copies of 11p, and homozygous 9p21 deletion with negative p16 expression.25–27 Additionally, kinase fusions of ROS1, NTRK1, ALK, BRAF, and RET are found in the entire spectrum of spitzoid neoplasms in a mutually exclusive pattern.28 More recently, two 4-probe FISH assays targeting 6p25(RREB1), 11q13 (CCND1), 9p21 (CDKN2A), and 8q24(C-MYC) and 6p25 (RREB1), 6q23 (MYB), Cep6 (centromere 6), and 11q13 (CCND1) used to differentiate between melanoma and benign nevi have been applied to Spitz tumors.22,29 However, caution must be exercised when evaluating an overall positive FISH assay as 20–23% of Spitz nevi are positive in at least one of the individual FISH probes.22,29 In conjunction with FISH and histological features of atypical Spitz tumors, the application of IHC panels assessing the expression of proteins involved in cell cycle regulation (Ki67, p16) and melanocytic markers (HMB45) can also be helpful in classifying spitzoid lesions.

The clinical progression of spitzoid lesions is different from melanoma. Up to 39% of patients with atypical Spitz tumors will have nodal metastases. However, unlike patients with melanoma, nodal disease does not confer the same high mortality risk and there is rarely further disease progression.32–34 Several genetic markers have been identified as potential prognostic indicators. Among atypical Spitz tumors, gains in 6p25 (RREB1), 11q13 (CCND1), and homozygous deletions of 9p21 (CDKN2A) are associated with a higher risk of aggressive clinical behavior. TERT-p mutations, found in >90% of CM, may also be a marker of more aggressive behavior when present in spitzoid lesions.20,35 Conversely, isolated 6q23 (MYB) loss and loss of 3p21 in BAP1-associated Spitz tumors are associated with a favorable clinical outcome.27,29


Structure of the skin. The genetics of skin cancer is an extremely broad topic. There are more than 100 types of tumors that are clinically apparent on the skin; many of these are known to have familial components, either in isolation or as part of a syndrome with other features. This is, in part, because the skin itself is a complex organ made up of multiple cell types. Furthermore, many of these cell types can undergo malignant transformation at various points in their differentiation, leading to tumors with distinct histology and dramatically different biological behaviors, such as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and basal cell cancer (BCC). These have been called nonmelanoma skin cancers or keratinocyte cancers. The outer layer or epidermis is made primarily of keratinocytes but has several other minor cell populations. The bottom layer is formed of basal keratinocytes abutting the basement membrane. The basement membrane is formed from products of keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts, such as collagen and laminin, and is an important anatomical and functional structure. Basal keratinocytes lose contact with the basement membrane as they divide. As basal keratinocytes migrate toward the skin surface, they progressively differentiate to form the spinous cell layer; the granular cell layer; and the keratinized outer layer, or stratum corneum.The true cytologic origin of BCC remains in question. BCC and basal cell keratinocytes share many histologic similarities, as is reflected in the name. Alternatively, the outer root sheath cells of the hair follicle have also been proposed as the cell of origin for BCC.[2] This is suggested by the fact that BCCs occur predominantly on hair-bearing skin. BCCs rarely metastasize but can invade tissue locally or regionally, sometimes following along nerves. A tendency for superficial necrosis has resulted in the name rodent ulcer.[3] Some debate remains about the origin of SCC; however, these cancers are likely derived from epidermal stem cells associated with the hair follicle.[4] A variety of tissues, such as lung and uterine cervix, can give rise to SCC, and this cancer has somewhat differing behavior depending on its source. Even in cancer derived from the skin, SCC from different anatomic locations can have moderately differing aggressiveness; for example, SCC from glabrous (smooth, hairless) skin has a lower metastatic rate than SCC arising from the vermillion border of the lip or from scars.[3] Additionally, in the epidermal compartment, melanocytes distribute singly along the basement membrane and can undergo malignant transformation into melanoma. Melanocytes are derived from neural crest cells and migrate to the epidermal compartment near the eighth week of gestational age. Langerhans cells, or dendritic cells, are another cell type in the epidermis and have a primary function of antigen presentation. These cells reside in the skin for an extended time and respond to different stimuli, such as ultraviolet radiation or topical steroids, which cause them to migrate out of the skin.[5] The dermis is largely composed of an extracellular matrix. Prominent cell types in this compartment are fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and transient immune system cells. When transformed, fibroblasts form fibrosarcomas and endothelial cells form angiosarcomas, Kaposi sarcoma, and other vascular tumors. There are a number of immune cell types that move in and out of the skin to blood vessels and lymphatics; these include mast cells, lymphocytes, mononuclear cells, histiocytes, and granulocytes. These cells can increase in number in inflammatory diseases and can form tumors within the skin. For example, urticaria pigmentosa is a condition that arises from mast cells and is occasionally associated with mast cell leukemia; cutaneous T-cell lymphoma is often confined to the skin throughout its course. Overall, 10% of leukemias and lymphomas have prominent expression in the skin.[6]Epidermal appendages are also found in the dermal compartment. These are derivatives of the epidermal keratinocytes, such as hair follicles, sweat glands, and the sebaceous glands associated with the hair follicles. These structures are generally formed in the first and second trimesters of fetal development. These can form a large variety of benign or malignant tumors with diverse biological behaviors. Several of these tumors are associated with familial syndromes. Overall, there are dozens of different histological subtypes of these tumors associated with individual components of the adnexal structures.[7]Finally, the subcutis is a layer that extends below the dermis with varying depth, depending on the anatomic location. This deeper boundary can include muscle, fascia, bone, or cartilage. The subcutis can be affected by inflammatory conditions such as panniculitis and malignancies such as liposarcoma.[8]These compartments give rise to their own malignancies but are also the region of immediate adjacent spread of localized skin cancers from other compartments. The boundaries of each skin compartment are used to define the staging of skin cancers. For example, an in situ melanoma is confined to the epidermis. Once the cancer crosses the basement membrane into the dermis, it is invasive. Internal malignancies also commonly metastasize to the skin. The dermis and subcutis are the most common locations, but the epidermis can also be involved in conditions such as Pagetoid breast cancer.

Function of the Skin. The skin has a wide variety of functions. First, the skin is an important barrier preventing extensive water and temperature loss and providing protection against minor abrasions. These functions can be aberrantly regulated in cancer. For example, in the erythroderma (reddening of the skin) associated with advanced cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, alterations in the regulations of body temperature can result in profound heat loss. Second, the skin has important adaptive and innate immunity functions. In adaptive immunity, antigen-presenting cells engender T-cell responses consisting of increased levels of TH1, TH2, or TH17 cells.[9] In innate immunity, the immune system produces numerous peptides with antibacterial and antifungal capacity. Consequently, even small breaks in the skin can lead to infection. The skin-associated lymphoid tissue is one of the largest arms of the immune system. It may also be important in immune surveillance against cancer. Immunosuppression, which occurs during organ transplant, is a significant risk factor for skin cancer. The skin is significant for communication through facial expression and hand movements. Unfortunately, areas of specialized function, such as the area around the eyes and ears, are common places for cancer to occur. Even small cancers in these areas can lead to reconstructive challenges and have significant cosmetic and social ramifications.[1]

Clinical Presentation of Skin Cancers. While the appearance of any one skin cancer can vary, there are general physical presentations that can be used in screening. BCCs most commonly have a pearly rim or can appear somewhat eczematous (refer to Figure 2 and Figure 3). They often ulcerate (refer to Figure 2). SCCs frequently have a thick keratin top layer (refer to Figure 4). Both BCCs and SCCs are associated with a history of sun-damaged skin. Melanomas are characterized by asymmetry, border irregularity, color variation, a diameter of more than 6 mm, and evolution (ABCDE criteria). (Refer to What Does Melanoma Look Like? on NCI's website for more information about the ABCDE criteria.) Photographs representing typical clinical presentations of these cancers are shown below.
