Melanoma-specific survival for pediatric melanoma is increasing by 4% per year.5 Furthermore, recent studies have demonstrated that the rate of pediatric melanoma is decreasing. The overall prevalence and incidence are both relatively low and will continue to decrease if effective public health campaigns continue to be implemented.7 Future analyses of prevention techniques should begin to take into account cultural and sociological factors that affect adherence to sun-safety recommendations to ensure that preventions are not targeted solely at the fair-skinned individuals. For the Latino populations in the US, acculturation to US culture actually decreased sun-safety behaviors, partly related to a lack of perceived risk in darker-skinned populations.70 This underscores the importance of diverse interventions that target all demographics impacted by pediatric melanoma.

Survival for pediatric melanoma has improved over the past 30 years, possibly due to improved staging.5 Five-year overall survival for all stages is 87–95%.4,5,38,43 Similar to adults, the main predictor of outcomes in melanoma is the stage at the time of diagnosis.4,5,38,43 Among patients with stage IV metastatic melanoma, the median survival time is <1 year and 5-year overall survival is <12%.4 Children <10 years old are more likely to present with a higher stage disease, which may in part be due to delayed diagnosis of children with melanoma.4,10,43

Data are conflicting regarding the prognostic role of age, gender, tumor thickness, ulceration, and sentinel lymph node status. In some studies, younger children <10 years old have significantly poorer survival as compared to adolescents, while in other studies, adolescents have decreased survival compared to younger children.4,9,43,51,52 The data are mixed regarding the contribution of patient gender to overall survival and the interaction with patient’s age and overall survival.4,5,38,43,53 Younger children often present with thicker tumors than adults.4,7,36 However, the association between tumor thickness and survival may be different between adults and children.4,53 Conversely, other studies have demonstrated that increasing tumor thickness is associated with poorer survival among pediatric melanoma patients.5,38,43 Tumor ulceration is also more common among young children <10 years and is associated with worse outcomes.7,38,43 In addition, tumor thickness and ulceration are strong predictors of sentinel lymph node metastases among children.54 Similar to adults, a positive sentinel lymph node is associated with poorer prognosis.54,55 The prognostic implications of other traditional risk factors among adults with melanoma, including vertical growth phase, vascular invasion, and high mitotic activity, do not appear to be correlated with an increased risk of mortality.33,43,53

One goal of follow-up care is to check for a recurrence, which means that the cancer has come back. Cancer recurs because small areas of cancer cells may remain undetected in the body. Over time, these cells may increase in number until they show up on test results or cause signs or symptoms. During follow-up care, a doctor familiar with your medical history can give you personalized information about your risk of recurrence. Your doctor will ask specific questions about your health. Some people may have blood tests or imaging tests done as part of regular follow-up care, but testing recommendations depend on several factors, including the type and stage of cancer originally diagnosed and the types of treatment given.

In general, physical and skin examinations are performed every 3 to 6 months for the first 2 to 3 years and then once a year after that. However, your doctor may recommend a different follow-up schedule. A chest x-ray, CT scan, MRI, and/or PET-CT scan may be recommended if the melanoma has a higher chance of coming back. For people treated for early-stage melanoma, scans are not generally recommended during follow-up care.

The anticipation before having a follow-up test or waiting for test results can add stress to you or a family member. This is sometimes called “scan-xiety.” Learn more about how to cope with this type of stress.

Preventing and detecting second skin cancers. Routine screening with a skin examination for a new melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer is a necessary part of follow-up care, as is sun protection and sun avoidance. Screening for melanoma and other skin cancers may include mole mapping (photography of the moles) by a doctor or other health care professional. If possible, you should ask your doctor for copies of your photographs and learn how to perform a skin self-examination. There is growing evidence that individuals who are followed using photographs are diagnosed at an earlier stage of melanoma. Protecting your skin from UV radiation is important to help prevent second skin cancers, either melanoma or non-melanoma skin cancer. Many people who are treated for melanoma lead an active, outdoor lifestyle. It is important to take steps to protect yourself from further skin damage. You can protect against further sun damage by: Participating in outdoor activities before 10:00 AM or after 4:00 PM. Wearing long sleeves and pants. Using a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30. Please remember to reapply sunscreen every 2 hours or, if you are sweating or in the water, every hour. Wearing UV-protective sunglasses. Wearing a hat. A major consideration following diagnosis and treatment of melanoma is adjusting a person’s lifestyle to use sun-protective or sun-avoidance measures at all times, as well as avoiding indoor tanning devices. In addition, if a person works in an area where there is high UV exposure, there may be job-related issues to consider. Learn more about protecting your skin from the sun.Managing long-term and late side effects

Most people expect to experience side effects when receiving treatment. However, it is often surprising to survivors that some side effects may linger beyond the treatment period. These are called long-term side effects. Other side effects called late effects may develop months or even years afterwards. Long-term and late effects can include both physical and emotional changes.

Talk with your doctor about your risk of developing such side effects based on the type of cancer, your individual treatment plan, and your overall health. If you had a treatment known to cause specific late effects, you may have certain physical examinations, scans, or blood tests to help find and manage them.

For an early-stage, thin melanoma, the surgery is most often outpatient surgery with little need for rehabilitation. With a thicker melanoma and possible skin grafts, depending on the location, there may be some need for rehabilitation following treatment. As explained in Coping With Treatment, some patients experience lymphedema or chronic pain. Talk with your health care team about how these can be managed.

You and your doctor should work together to develop a personalized follow-up care plan. Be sure to discuss any concerns you have about your future physical or emotional health. ASCO offers forms to help keep track of the cancer treatment you received and develop a survivorship care plan after treatment is completed. This is also a good time to talk with your doctor about who will lead your follow-up care. Some survivors continue to see their oncologist, while others transition back to the care of their family doctor or another health care professional. This decision depends on several factors, including the type and stage of cancer, side effects, health insurance rules, and your personal preferences. If a doctor who was not directly involved in your cancer care will lead your follow-up care, be sure to share your cancer treatment summary and survivorship care plan forms with him or her and with all future health care providers. Details about your cancer treatment are very valuable to the health care professionals who will care for you throughout your lifetime.
