Late effects are health problems that occur months or years after treatment has ended.

The treatment of cancer may cause health problems for childhood cancer survivors months or years after successful treatment has ended. Cancer treatments may harm the body's organs, tissues, or bones and cause health problems later in life. These health problems are called late effects.

Treatments that may cause late effects include the following:Surgery.Chemotherapy.Radiation therapy.Stem cell transplant.Doctors are studying the late effects caused by cancer treatment. They are working to improve cancer treatments and stop or lessen late effects. While most late effects are not life-threatening, they may cause serious problems that affect health and quality of life.

Late effects in childhood cancer survivors may affect the following:Organs, tissues, and body function.Growth and development.Mood, feelings, and actions.Thinking, learning, and memory.Social and psychological adjustment.Risk of second cancers.There are three important factors that affect the risk of late effects.

Many childhood cancer survivors will have late effects. The risk of late effects depends on factors related to the tumor, treatment, and patient. These include the following: Tumor-related factors: Type of cancer.Where the tumor is in the body.How the tumor affects the way tissues and organs work.Treatment-related factorsType of surgery.Chemotherapy type, dose, and schedule.Type of radiation therapy, part of the body treated, and dose.Stem cell transplant.Use of two or more types of treatment at the same time.Blood product transfusion.Chronic graft-versus-host disease.Patient-related factorsThe child's sex.Health problems the child had before being diagnosed with cancer.The child’s age and developmental stage when diagnosed and treated.Length of time since diagnosis and treatment.Changes in hormone levels.The ability of healthy tissue affected by cancer treatment to repair itself.Certain changes in the child's genes.Family history of cancer or other conditions.Health habits.

The chance of having late effects increases over time.

New treatments for childhood cancer have decreased the number of deaths from the primary cancer. Because childhood cancer survivors are living longer, they are having more late effects after cancer treatment. Survivors may not live as long as people who did not have cancer. The most common causes of death in childhood cancer survivors are:

The primary cancer comes back.A second (different) primary cancer forms.Heart and lung damage.Studies of the causes of late effects have led to changes in treatment. This has improved the quality of life for cancer survivors and helps prevent illness and death from late effects.

Regular follow-up care is very important for survivors of childhood cancer.Regular follow-up by health professionals who are trained to find and treat late effects is important for the long-term health of childhood cancer survivors. Follow-up care will be different for each person who has been treated for cancer. The type of care will depend on the type of cancer, the type of treatment, genetic factors, and the person's general health and health habits. Follow-up care includes checking for signs and symptoms of late effects and health education on how to prevent or lessen late effects.

It is important that childhood cancer survivors have an exam at least once a year. The exams should be done by a health professional who knows the survivor's risk for late effects and can recognize the early signs of late effects. Blood and imaging tests may also be done.

Long-term follow-up may improve the health and quality of life for cancer survivors. It also helps doctors study the late effects of cancer treatments so that safer therapies for newly diagnosed children may be developed.

Good health habits are also important for survivors of childhood cancer.The quality of life for cancer survivors may be improved by behaviors that promote health and well-being. These include a healthy diet, exercise, and regular medical and dental checkups. These self-care behaviors are especially important for cancer survivors because of their risk of health problems related to treatment. Healthy behaviors may make late effects less severe and lower the risk of other diseases.

Avoiding behaviors that are damaging to health is also important. Smoking, excess alcohol use, illegal drug use, being exposed to sunlight, or not being physically active may worsen organ damage related to treatment and may increase the risk of second cancers.


Second Cancers:Childhood cancer survivors have an increased risk of a second cancer later in life.
Certain genetic patterns or syndromes may increase the risk of a second cancer.
Patients who have been treated for cancer need regular screening tests to check for a second cancer.
The kind of test used to screen for a second cancer depends in part on the kind of cancer treatment the patient had in the past.
Childhood cancer survivors have an increased risk of a second cancer later in life.
A different primary cancer that occurs at least two months after cancer treatment ends is called a second cancer. A second cancer may occur months or years after treatment is completed. The type of second cancer that occurs depends in part on the original type of cancer and the cancer treatment. Benign tumors (not cancer) may also occur.
Second cancers that occur after cancer treatment include the following:Solid tumors.Myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. Solid tumors that may appear more than 10 years after primary cancer diagnosis and treatment include the following:
Nonmelanoma skin cancer (basal cell carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma). There is an increased risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer after radiation treatment; it usually appears in the area where radiation was given. Being exposed to UV radiation may increase this risk. Patients who develop nonmelanoma skin cancer after radiation treatment have an increased chance of developing other types of cancers in the future. The risk of basal cell carcinoma is also increased after treatment with chemotherapy drugs, called vinca alkaloids, such as vincristine and vinblastine.
Malignant melanoma. Malignant melanoma may occur after radiation or combination chemotherapy with alkylating agents and antimitotic drugs (such as vincristine and vinblastine). Survivors of Hodgkin lymphoma, hereditary retinoblastoma, soft tissue sarcoma, and gonadal tumors are more likely to be at a higher risk of having malignant melanoma. Malignant melanoma as a second cancer is less common than nonmelanoma skin cancer.
Alkylating agent such as cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, mechlorethamine, melphalan, busulfan, carmustine, lomustine, chlorambucil, or dacarbazine.
Topoisomerase II inhibitor agent such as etoposide or teniposide.
Certain genetic patterns or syndromes may increase the risk of a second cancer.
Some childhood cancer survivors may have an increased risk of developing a second cancer because they have a family history of cancer or an inherited cancer syndrome such as Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Problems with the way DNA is repaired in cells and the way anticancer drugs are used by the body may also affect the risk of second cancers.

Patients who have been treated for cancer need regular screening tests to check for a second cancer. It is important for patients who have been treated for cancer to be checked for a second cancer before symptoms appear. This is called screening for a second cancer and may help find a second cancer at an early stage. When abnormal tissue or cancer is found early, it may be easier to treat. By the time symptoms appear, cancer may have begun to spread. It is important to remember that your child's doctor does not necessarily think your child has cancer if he or she suggests a screening test. Screening tests are given when your child has no cancer symptoms. If a screening test result is abnormal, your child may need to have more tests done to find out if he or she has a second cancer. These are called diagnostic tests.

The kind of test used to screen for a second cancer depends in part on the kind of cancer treatment the patient had in the past. All patients who have been treated for cancer should have a physical exam and medical history done once a year. A physical exam of the body is done to check general signs of health, including checking for signs of disease, such as lumps, changes in the skin, or anything else that seems unusual. A medical history is taken to learn about the patient’s health habits and past illnesses and treatments.

If the patient received radiation therapy, the following tests and procedures may be used to check for skin, breast, or colorectal cancer:Skin exam: A doctor or nurse checks the skin for bumps or spots that look abnormal in color, size, shape, or texture, especially in the area where radiation was given. It is suggested that a skin exam be done once a year to check for signs of skin cancer.
Breast self-exam: An exam of the breast by the patient. The patient carefully feels the breasts and under the arms for lumps or anything else that seems unusual. It is suggested that women treated with a higher dose of radiation therapy to the chest do a monthly breast self-exam beginning at puberty until age 25 years. Women who were treated with a lower dose of radiation to the chest may not need to begin checking for breast cancer at puberty. Talk to your doctor about when you should begin breast self-exams.
Clinical breast exam (CBE): An exam of the breast by a doctor or other health professional. The doctor will carefully feel the breasts and under the arms for lumps or anything else that seems unusual. It is suggested that women treated with a higher dose of radiation therapy to the chest have a clinical breast exam every year beginning at puberty until age 25 years. After age 25 years or 8 years after radiation treatments end (whichever is first), clinical breast exams are done every 6 months. Women who were treated with a lower dose of radiation to the chest may not need to begin checking for breast cancer at puberty. Talk to your doctor about when you should begin clinical breast exams.
Mammogram: An x-ray of the breast. A mammogram may be done in women who had a higher dose of radiation to the chest and who do not have dense breasts. It is suggested that these women have a mammogram once a year starting 8 years after treatment or at age 25 years, whichever is later. Talk to your doctor about when you should begin to have mammograms to check for breast cancer.
Breast MRI (magnetic resonance imaging): A procedure that uses a magnet, radio waves, and a computer to make a series of detailed pictures of the breast. This procedure is also called nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI). An MRI may be done in women who had a higher dose of radiation to the chest and who have dense breasts. It is suggested that these women have an MRI once a year starting 8 years after treatment or at age 25 years, whichever is later. If you had radiation to the chest, talk to your doctor about whether you need an MRI of the breast to check for breast cancer.
Colonoscopy: A procedure to look inside the rectum and colon for polyps, abnormal areas, or cancer. A colonoscope is inserted through the rectum into the colon. A colonoscope is a thin, tube-like instrument with a light and a lens for viewing. It may also have a tool to remove polyps or tissue samples, which are checked under a microscope for signs of cancer. It is suggested that childhood cancer survivors who had a higher dose of radiation to the abdomen, pelvis, or spine have a colonoscopy every 5 years. This begins at age 35 years or 10 years after treatment ended, whichever is later. If you had radiation to the abdomen, pelvis, or spine, talk to your doctor about when you should begin to have a colonoscopies to check for colorectal cancer.
